README.md, before:


# Corth
It's like [Porth](https://gitlab.com/tsoding/porth/-/tree/master/), which is like [Forth](https://www.forth.com/forth/) but written in Python, but written in C++. But I don't actually know for sure since I never programmed in Porth or Forth, I only heard that they are some sort of stack-based programming language. Corth is also stack-based programming language. Which makes it just like Porth, just like Forth, am I rite?

Also, it compiles directly to executable on multiple platforms (not MacOS (yet)).

---

## How to write in Corth
Corth, like Porth (like Forth), is a stack based language. \
This means that in order to do any operation, a value must be pushed onto the stack. \
Think of this as a literal stack of objects. \
Likely, the operation will take it's arguments from the top of the stack, or `pop` from the stack.

Take a look at this example in Corth: \
`34 35 + #` \
It is a basic Corth program that will add two numbers together, and then display the sum to the console. \
The expected output for the above program when run is `69` \
Let's break down how it works piece-by-piece:
|Step|Code|Description|
|---|---|---|
|1|`34`| A value is pushed on to the stack, meaning stacked on top. |
|2|`35`| Another value is pushed on to the stack. |
|3|`+`| The `+` symbol will pop the two most-recent values off the stack, add them, then push the sum on to the stack. |
|4|`#`| The `#` symbol will dump from the stack, aka pop a value off and then print it to the console. |

Stack breakdown by step:
1. { 34 }
2. { 34, 35 }
3. { 69 }
4. { }

Best practices in Corth indicate that the stack should be empty by the end of the program.

### Definitions:
| Operator | Meaning | Description |
|---|---|---|
|`#`| Dump | Humankind's best friend; pops the most recent value off the stack, then prints that to the console. |
|`+`| Addition | Pops the two most-recent values off the stack, then pushes the sum. |
|`-`| Subtraction | Pops the two most-recent values off the stack, then pushes the difference. |
|`*`| Multiplication | Pops the two most-recent values off the stack, then pushes the product. |
|`/`| Division | Pops the two most-recent values off the stack, then pushes the quotient. |

---

## How to build a Corth program
So, you've written a program, what do you do now that you want to run it?

The easiest thing to do is to simulate the program. \
To do this, simply use the `-sim` or `--simulate` command line argument i.e. \
Windows: `Path/To/Corth.exe -sim test.corth` \
Linux: `./Path/To/Corth -sim test.corth`

If you do not already have the Corth executable, you can either download it from the [releases page](https://github.com/LensPlaysGames/Corth/releases) or build it yourself using CMake after cloning the repository (further instructions down below).

If you would like to compile the corth program into an executable file, there are a few more steps.

First, you must ensure that you have [NASM](https://www.nasm.us/) installed somewhere on your machine. \
On Windows you can [Download the installer from the official website](https://www.nasm.us/) \
On Linux, run the following CMD: `apt install nasm` \
NASM is the assembler that this project is built for. Eventually, different types of assembly will be able to be generated. \
If you are on Windows and you didn't install it in the default directory the installer prompted, keep in mind the path to the 'nasm' executable file itself. You will need it later for the `-a` or `--assembler-path` command line option. \
The only assembly syntax supported right now is NASM, but that will change in the future (i.e. [GAS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_Assembler)).

Second, you must ensure that you have some sort of linker on your machine that can link against the standard C runtime of whatever platform you're on. \
For example, this might be [GoLink](http://godevtool.com/) on Windows. GoLink is easy to use and fast to setup; simply extract it and it's ready. \
On Linux, this is most likely `ld`, the GNU linker; it comes with most linux distros by default.

Once all the pre-requisites are installed, now comes time to use the CCLI, or Corth Command Line Interface. \
Ideally, it will be very similar to the simulate command up above, but sometimes quite a few arguments need to be specified. \
To avoid this as much as possible, Corth sets default values based on your operating system.

##### Small bug warning -- On Linux, if you specify an output name to Corth with `-o`, it may not be reflected in the output executable of your linker! Look for `a.out` or similar.

### On Windows
Open a terminal and navigate to the directory containing Corth.exe. \
To familiarize yourself with the options of the CCLI, run the following command: \
`Corth.exe -h` or `Corth.exe --help` \
A lot of different options will come up, with (hopefully) clear explanations on what everything does. \
Because there are a lot, I will tell you the ones you will most likely need right away:
- `-com` or `--compile`
  - Specifies that Corth needs to generate assembly, assemble it into machine code, then link it into an executable.
- `-a` or `--assembler-path`
  - This does what it sounds like, and allows the user to specify the path to the assembler `.exe` file to run. Set this to the exact path of `nasm.exe` on your machine, including file name and extension. If you downloaded it at the default location, Corth's defaults should work as well, so ideally you won't need to specify this argument.
- `-l` or `--linker-path`
  - Specify the path to the linker `.exe` file to run. This will be the path to `golink.exe` including file name and extension. Again, if you downloaded at the default locations, everything should work fine without specifying any extra arguments.
- `-gen` or `--generate`
  - Tell Corth to not use any command line tools to assemble or link anything; simply generate the output assembly file for the given platform and program. Useful if you would like to use a completely different assembling and linking ecosystem.

Basic example: \
`Corth.exe -com test.corth`

Or, if Corth is giving errors about not finding assembler/linker: \
`Corth.exe -com -a /Path/To/NASM/nasm.exe -l /Path/To/GoLink/golink.exe test.corth`

Alternatively, you could add the directory containing the executable to your system's [PATH environment variable](https://www.c-sharpcorner.com/article/add-a-directory-to-path-environment-variable-in-windows-10/): \
`Corth.exe -com -a nasm.exe -l golink.exe test.corth`

By default, the assembler and linker options are setup for Windows, using NASM and GoLink. \
If your situation is different, make sure to specify the correct options using `-ao` and `-lo` respectively.

### On Linux
Open a terminal and navigate to the directory containing the Corth executable. \
To familiarize yourself with the options of the CCLI, run the following command: \
`./Corth -h` or `./Corth --help` \
A lot of options will appear, but most will not be needed unless you are getting errors, as the defaults are platform-specific.
- `-linux` or `-linux64`
  - Tell Corth to generate Linux assembly for NASM.
- `-com` or `--compile`
  - Specifies compilation mode to Corth. This tells corth to generate assembly, assemble it, and link it into an executable.
- `-gen` or `--generate`
  - Tell Corth to not use any command line tools to assemble or link anything; simply generate the output assembly file for the given platform and program. Useful if you would like to use a completely different assembling and linking ecosystem.

Basic Example (given `apt install nasm` was run and `ld` is installed by default): \
`./Corth -com test.corth`

Verbose Example: \
`./Corth -com -a nasm -ao "-f elf64 corth_program.asm" -l ld -lo " -dynamic-linker /lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2 -lc -m elf_x86_64 -o corth_program corth_program.o" test.corth`

### Common Errors:
- "Assembler not found at x"
  - Solution: Specify a valid path, including file name and extension, to the assembler executable using `-a` or `--assembler-path`
- "Linker not found at x"
  - Solution: Specify a valid path, including file name and extension, to the linker executable using `-l Path/To/Linker.exe` or `--linker-path Path/To/Linker.exe`

---

## How to build Corth from source
This project uses [CMake](https://cmake.org/) to build Corth for any platform that CMake supports (which is a lot). \
This means Corth source code can be easily built in your favorite IDE that supports C++ (or with make, you linux-folk).

First, on any platform, clone this repository to your local machine.

Run the following command in the repository directory: \
`cmake -S . -B build/`

This will use CMake to build a build system with the default generator on your platform.

Commit message:

Else conditionals (even nested if-else)
- Moved `printf`s to `Log`s
- Added documentation for `-o` CCLI option
- Moved to instruction pointer based loops vs auto-ranged for based loops
- Moved keywords to enum vs hard-coded strings
- Removed stack validation from simulation as the tokens are already stack-validated in a previous step (after loading and lexing file)

README.md, after:


# Corth
It's like [Porth](https://gitlab.com/tsoding/porth/-/tree/master/), which is like [Forth](https://www.forth.com/forth/) but written in Python, but written in C++. But I don't actually know for sure since I never programmed in Porth or Forth, I only heard that they are some sort of stack-based programming language. Corth is also stack-based programming language. Which makes it just like Porth, just like Forth, am I rite?

Also, it compiles directly to executable on multiple platforms (not MacOS (yet)).

---

## How to write in Corth
Corth, like Porth (like Forth), is a stack based language. \
This means that in order to do any operation, a value must be pushed onto the stack. \
Think of this as a literal stack of objects. \
Likely, the operation will take it's arguments from the top of the stack, or `pop` from the stack.

Take a look at this example in Corth: \
`34 35 + #` \
It is a basic Corth program that will add two numbers together, and then display the sum to the console. \
The expected output for the above program when run is `69` \
Let's break down how it works piece-by-piece:
|Step|Code|Description|
|---|---|---|
|1|`34`| A value is pushed on to the stack, meaning stacked on top. |
|2|`35`| Another value is pushed on to the stack. |
|3|`+`| The `+` symbol will pop the two most-recent values off the stack, add them, then push the sum on to the stack. |
|4|`#`| The `#` symbol will dump from the stack, aka pop a value off and then print it to the console. |

Stack breakdown by step:
1. { 34 }
2. { 34, 35 }
3. { 69 }
4. { }

Best practices in Corth indicate that the stack should be empty by the end of the program.

### Definitions:
| Operator | Meaning | Description |
|---|---|---|
|`#`| Dump | Humankind's best friend; pops the most recent value off the stack, then prints that to the console. |
|`+`| Addition | Pops the two most-recent values off the stack, then pushes the sum. |
|`-`| Subtraction | Pops the two most-recent values off the stack, then pushes the difference. |
|`*`| Multiplication | Pops the two most-recent values off the stack, then pushes the product. |
|`/`| Division | Pops the two most-recent values off the stack, then pushes the quotient. |

---

## How to build a Corth program
So, you've written a program, what do you do now that you want to run it?

The easiest thing to do is to simulate the program. \
To do this, simply use the `-sim` or `--simulate` command line argument i.e. \
Windows: `Path/To/Corth.exe -sim test.corth` \
Linux: `./Path/To/Corth -sim test.corth`

If you do not already have the Corth executable, you can either download it from the [releases page](https://github.com/LensPlaysGames/Corth/releases) or build it yourself using CMake after cloning the repository (further instructions down below).

If you would like to compile the corth program into an executable file, there are a few more steps.

First, you must ensure that you have [NASM](https://www.nasm.us/) installed somewhere on your machine. \
On Windows you can [Download the installer from the official website](https://www.nasm.us/) \
On Linux, run the following CMD: `apt install nasm` \
NASM is the assembler that this project is built for. Eventually, different types of assembly will be able to be generated. \
If you are on Windows and you didn't install it in the default directory the installer prompted, keep in mind the path to the 'nasm' executable file itself. You will need it later for the `-a` or `--assembler-path` command line option. \
The only assembly syntax supported right now is NASM, but that will change in the future (i.e. [GAS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_Assembler)).

Second, you must ensure that you have some sort of linker on your machine that can link against the standard C runtime of whatever platform you're on. \
For example, this might be [GoLink](http://godevtool.com/) on Windows. GoLink is easy to use and fast to setup; simply extract it and it's ready. \
On Linux, this is most likely `ld`, the GNU linker; it comes with most linux distros by default.

Once all the pre-requisites are installed, now comes time to use the CCLI, or Corth Command Line Interface. \
Ideally, it will be very similar to the simulate command up above, but sometimes quite a few arguments need to be specified. \
To avoid this as much as possible, Corth sets default values based on your operating system.

##### Small bug warning -- On Linux, if you specify an output name to Corth with `-o`, it may not be reflected in the output executable of your linker! Look for `a.out` or similar.

### On Windows
Open a terminal and navigate to the directory containing Corth.exe. \
To familiarize yourself with the options of the CCLI, run the following command: \
`Corth.exe -h` or `Corth.exe --help` \
A lot of different options will come up, with (hopefully) clear explanations on what everything does. \
Because there are a lot, I will tell you the ones you will most likely need right away:
- `-com` or `--compile`
  - Specifies that Corth needs to generate assembly, assemble it into machine code, then link it into an executable.
- `-a` or `--assembler-path`
  - This does what it sounds like, and allows the user to specify the path to the assembler `.exe` file to run. Set this to the exact path of `nasm.exe` on your machine, including file name and extension. If you downloaded it at the default location, Corth's defaults should work as well, so ideally you won't need to specify this argument.
- `-l` or `--linker-path`
  - Specify the path to the linker `.exe` file to run. This will be the path to `golink.exe` including file name and extension. Again, if you downloaded at the default locations, everything should work fine without specifying any extra arguments.
- `-o` or `--output-name`
  - Specify the name of the generated assembly, object, and executable files.
- `-gen` or `--generate`
  - Tell Corth to not use any command line tools to assemble or link anything; simply generate the output assembly file for the given platform and program. Useful if you would like to use a completely different assembling and linking ecosystem.

Basic example: \
`Corth.exe -com test.corth`

Or, if Corth is giving errors about not finding assembler/linker: \
`Corth.exe -com -a /Path/To/NASM/nasm.exe -l /Path/To/GoLink/golink.exe test.corth`

Alternatively, you could add the directory containing the executable to your system's [PATH environment variable](https://www.c-sharpcorner.com/article/add-a-directory-to-path-environment-variable-in-windows-10/): \
`Corth.exe -com -a nasm.exe -l golink.exe test.corth`

By default, the assembler and linker options are setup for Windows, using NASM and GoLink. \
If your situation is different, make sure to specify the correct options using `-ao` and `-lo` respectively.

### On Linux
Open a terminal and navigate to the directory containing the Corth executable. \
To familiarize yourself with the options of the CCLI, run the following command: \
`./Corth -h` or `./Corth --help` \
A lot of options will appear, but most will not be needed unless you are getting errors, as the defaults are platform-specific.
- `-linux` or `-linux64`
  - Tell Corth to generate Linux assembly for NASM.
- `-com` or `--compile`
  - Specifies compilation mode to Corth. This tells corth to generate assembly, assemble it, and link it into an executable.
- `-gen` or `--generate`
  - Tell Corth to not use any command line tools to assemble or link anything; simply generate the output assembly file for the given platform and program. Useful if you would like to use a completely different assembling and linking ecosystem.
- `-o` or `--output-name`
  - Specify the name of the generated assembly, object, and executable files. WARNING! There is currently a bug on linux where the output executable name will not change from "a.out". This means no matter what you pass here, the executable file will be over-written every time. I am working on fixing this issue.

Basic Example (given `apt install nasm` was run and `ld` is installed by default): \
`./Corth -com test.corth`

Verbose Example: \
`./Corth -com -a nasm -ao "-f elf64 corth_program.asm" -l ld -lo " -dynamic-linker /lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2 -lc -m elf_x86_64 -o corth_program corth_program.o" test.corth`

### Common Errors:
- "Assembler not found at x"
  - Solution: Specify a valid path, including file name and extension, to the assembler executable using `-a` or `--assembler-path`
- "Linker not found at x"
  - Solution: Specify a valid path, including file name and extension, to the linker executable using `-l Path/To/Linker.exe` or `--linker-path Path/To/Linker.exe`

---

## How to build Corth from source
This project uses [CMake](https://cmake.org/) to build Corth for any platform that CMake supports (which is a lot). \
This means Corth source code can be easily built in your favorite IDE that supports C++ (or with make, you linux-folk).

First, on any platform, clone this repository to your local machine.

Run the following command in the repository directory: \
`cmake -S . -B build/`

This will use CMake to build a build system with the default generator on your platform.
